---
layout: page
title: 
description: Assessing Sustainability of Last-Mile Distribution Strategies for E-commerce Deliveries in Chennai
img: 
importance: 1
category: MTech
related_publications: true
---

The surge in internet access in the past decade has paved the way for retailers to expand their market horizon with e-commerce platforms. This rise of e-commerce has bridged the gap between the consumer and the retailer, thus improving economic viability in urban freight – first pillar of sustainability. Further, e-commerce has enabled demand consolidation and delivery route optimization, thereby enhancing environmental efficiency in urban freight – second pillar of sustainability. Moreover, e-commerce has facilitated access to vital products for otherwise disadvantaged communities, thus advancing social equity in urban freight – third pillar of sustainability. This sustainable growth potential of e-commerce has drawn a growing number of retailers to compete for market through increasingly consumer-focused services. Often such consumer-focused services necessitate frequent less-than-truckload last-mile deliveries. As a consequence, urban freight witnesses a substantial increase in distribution cost as well as transportation-related negative externalities including greenhouse gas emissions advancing climate change, and criteria pollutant emissions affecting health of communities located close to logistics clusters. Hence, consumer-focused services significantly worsen the economic viability, environmental efficiency, and social equity in urban freight. Thus, to leverage the opportunities and cope with the challenges associated with last-mile deliveries, e-retailers establish alternate last-mile distribution strategies. Unlike the conventional strategy that includes use of diesel vehicles for home deliveries, these alternate strategies could include use of electric delivery vehicles for last-mile operations, a fleet of crowdsourced delivery vehicles for last-mile delivery, consolidation facilities coupled with light-duty delivery vehicles for a multi-echelon distribution, collection-points for customer pickup, or even drones and robots for autonomous operations. Thus, the objective of this study is to assess sustainability of different last-mile distribution strategies for an e-retailer offering delivery service in Chennai. To do so, this work will employ a Continuous Approximation (CA) based last-mile distribution model developed previously, and consequently, update and modify this model to suit the regional characteristics of Chennai Metropolitan Area. With this last-mile distribution model, this work will assess a) economic viability by evaluating the total cost of distribution stemming from fixed assets and associated operations; b) environmental efficiency by estimating the distribution-related emissions; and c) social equity by establishing the social cost of these emissions, for each of the different distribution strategies.
